AKIMBO DISPLAY - USER MANUAL
For Fedora with an XFCE/X11 desktop
Project: https://github.com/sharpredux/akimbo
Updated: 29 September 2026

CONTENTS
  1. What Akimbo does and what it requires
  2. Everyday use
  3. First installation and updating the installed copy
  4. Connecting over Wi-Fi or USB
  5. Moving windows, maximizing, and taskbar placement
  6. iPad models, resolution, and performance
  7. Saving settings and changing sessions
  8. Command reference
  9. Troubleshooting
 10. Stopping, recovery, and removal
 11. Files, privacy, and implementation notes


1. WHAT AKIMBO DOES AND WHAT IT REQUIRES

Akimbo extends your Linux desktop onto an iPad. Safari displays the extra
monitor, named AKIMBO-IPAD, through a local web server on the laptop.
Move windows between the laptop and iPad using the laptop's mouse and keyboard.
The Weylus backend also provides touch and stylus input support.

The supported host is Fedora with an XFCE desktop running X11. Run commands
as your normal user from a terminal inside that desktop session. Python 3.11
or newer is required. The full installer installs the build dependencies
and requests sudo for system setup.

This version needs an unused display connector, such as the laptop's HDMI
output. Akimbo uses it to activate a software display mode. No HDMI cable
or dummy plug is needed on the tested laptop. This depends on graphics-driver
support and is not guaranteed on every computer. If all display connectors
are already in use, this implementation cannot add another monitor.

Use either a shared local Wi-Fi network or a supported USB network connection.
Initial installation needs internet access to download dependencies. Wi-Fi
streaming itself does not need an internet connection. There is no built-in
internet relay, remote-access service, or connection between different sites.

Known limits:
  - Wayland is not supported by this controller.
  - Rotated, reflected, or scaled physical outputs are rejected.
  - One Akimbo display session runs at a time.
  - Audio streaming and Safari's on-screen keyboard are not supported.
  - Actual iPad touch/Pencil behavior and USB operation still need device
    testing; backend input initialization alone does not verify these.


2. EVERYDAY USE

After installation (see section 3), use the program as follows:

  1. Connect the laptop and iPad to the same local Wi-Fi network.
  2. Open a terminal on the laptop and run:

       akimbo-display start

  3. Open the printed Safari address on the iPad and enter the printed access
     code.
  4. The viewer should select "Monitor: AKIMBO-IPAD" automatically.
  5. When the video appears, tap "Enter Fullscreen" to hide Safari's browser
     controls. Safari requires this tap and will not enter fullscreen
     automatically. Swipe down using Safari's fullscreen gesture to exit.
  6. Drag a window downward through the middle of the laptop's bottom edge
     when using the default "below" placement.

Current iPadOS releases use Safari's page fullscreen mode. On older compatible
releases, Akimbo falls back to the native fullscreen video player. That legacy
mode is intended for viewing; touch and Pencil input may not be forwarded.
If Safari rejects the request, the fullscreen prompt stays visible so you can
try again. An unsupported browser displays an explanation instead of the
button.

If Akimbo says it is already running, use the existing address or run:

  akimbo-display restart

Reload Safari after a restart. To finish your display session:

  akimbo-display stop

Closing Safari or the laptop terminal does not stop the display service.
There is no automatic startup at login; start it when you need it.

An example viewer address is:

  http://192.168.1.13:1701

That is an example, not a permanent address. Always use the address printed
by "akimbo-display url" because the laptop's IP can change.


3. FIRST INSTALLATION AND UPDATING THE INSTALLED COPY

For a fresh installation, clone the project into your home directory:

  git clone https://github.com/sharpredux/akimbo.git ~/akimbo
  cd ~/akimbo
  python3 akimbo-display install

Enter your sudo password in the laptop terminal when requested. The installer
adds Fedora dependencies, configures input access and local firewall rules,
and builds Weylus with its video dependencies. The initial build can take
a while. It uses one CPU worker and memory limits to reduce system load.

After the full installation, log out and back in so group membership for
touch input takes effect. Then run:

  akimbo-display doctor

To copy updated program files from this project into the installed location,
without reinstalling system dependencies:

  cd ~/akimbo
  git pull --ff-only
  python3 akimbo-display install --user-only

If a display session is running, restart it afterward to load the updated
program. The installed copy is separate from this source directory; edits
to the source alone do not update the installed command.

If you cloned into another directory, use that directory in place of
~/akimbo. The --user-only option requires dependencies to be present
already. It does not build a missing Weylus backend or set up touch access.


4. CONNECTING OVER WI-FI OR USB

Wi-Fi

Put both devices on a local network that permits them to communicate.
Guest networks or device-isolation settings may prevent this even when both
devices show the same Wi-Fi name.

To explicitly choose Wi-Fi for a session:

  akimbo-display restart --transport wifi
  akimbo-display url --show-code

After changing networks, update the firewall rules for the new network:

  akimbo-display setup-network
  akimbo-display restart --transport wifi

USB

USB in this version means networking through the iPad's Personal Hotspot.
The cable does not act as a direct video input. A cable that only charges
the iPad is insufficient.

The supported path requires an iPad with cellular Personal Hotspot support,
a USB data cable, and a trusted connection. A Wi-Fi-only iPad does not provide
this Personal Hotspot path; use Wi-Fi with the current implementation.

To try the USB path:

  1. Connect the iPad with a USB data cable.
  2. Unlock it, accept "Trust This Computer", and enable Personal Hotspot.
  3. Linux must expose an active ipheth network interface with a private IPv4
     address before Akimbo can use it.
  4. On the laptop, run:

       akimbo-display setup-network
       akimbo-display restart --transport usb
       akimbo-display url --show-code

  5. Open the newly printed laptop address in Safari.

With --transport auto, Akimbo prefers an available USB link and otherwise
chooses Wi-Fi. Selection happens when the session starts. It does not switch
an existing session automatically when a cable is plugged in or removed.

Localhost and the web address

On the iPad, "localhost" refers to the iPad itself. Enter the laptop's printed
IP address with port 1701 instead. The current program binds its web server
to the selected network address, so localhost on the laptop is not its
configured viewer address either. Use http:// as printed, not https://.


5. MOVING WINDOWS, MAXIMIZING, AND TASKBAR PLACEMENT

The default iPad mini 7 layout places a 1510 x 992 monitor below the laptop
screen, centered horizontally. On a 1920-pixel-wide laptop screen, the iPad
region is narrower. Cross the bottom edge near its middle; crossing at a far
left or right corner may leave the cursor against the laptop's edge.

To move a window onto the iPad:

  1. If necessary, restore it from maximized size using its restore button.
  2. Hold the window's title bar and drag downward into the iPad area.
     For a browser, use a draggable title-bar area rather than a tab.
  3. Release it on the iPad.
  4. Use the maximize button to fill that monitor. Double-clicking the title
     bar also works when XFCE's double-click action is set to maximize.

Normal XFCE edge tiling remains available when enabled in your window-manager
settings. Akimbo does not add a separate "maximize on every drop" behavior.

An empty iPad desktop can look black until you move a window onto it.
The desktop wallpaper is not guaranteed to be drawn in the virtual area.
Safari toolbars can reduce the visible area and leave borders. Adding the
page to the iPad Home Screen may provide a larger viewing area.

Akimbo temporarily pins panels whose output selection is automatic to the
laptop's eDP display. This keeps the taskbar and launcher above the laptop's
bottom edge. Panels already assigned to a specific output are left alone.
While Akimbo is running, panels use always-hide with no hide animation. This
prevents a panel from sliding into a display below the laptop and keeps a
fullscreen video unobstructed when another monitor receives focus or input.
The prior panel selections, hide modes, and animation speeds are restored when
Akimbo stops, unless you changed a managed setting yourself while it was
running.

The program also refreshes XFCE's window manager with a compatibility library
so it recognizes the extra monitor for dragging, maximizing, and tiling.
A brief desktop redraw at startup or shutdown is expected.


6. IPAD MODELS, RESOLUTION, AND PERFORMANCE

List the profiles built into the program:

  akimbo-display models list

Show one profile and its preset resolutions:

  akimbo-display models show ipad-mini-7

Available profile IDs:

  ipad-mini-7       iPad mini (A17 Pro / 7)
  ipad-mini-6       iPad mini (6th generation)
  ipad-10           iPad (10th generation)
  ipad-air-5        iPad Air (5th generation)
  ipad-pro-11-m4    iPad Pro 11-inch (M4)
  ipad-pro-13-m4    iPad Pro 13-inch (M4)
  custom            Your own resolution

Profiles are selected explicitly; Akimbo does not detect the model from the
iPad. They set resolution and display dimensions, not device-specific drivers.

iPad mini 7 landscape presets:

  performance    1132 x 744     Lower pixel count; useful for reducing load
  balanced       1510 x 992     Default starting point
  native         2266 x 1488    More desktop space; smaller interface elements

Portrait swaps width and height. Changing the iPad's physical orientation
does not automatically change the Akimbo layout.

Examples for the next session:

  akimbo-display restart --quality performance --fps 30
  akimbo-display restart --quality native
  akimbo-display restart --orientation portrait --position right
  akimbo-display restart --model ipad-mini-6 --resolution ''

Supported frame-rate requests range from 1 to 60. The default is 30.
A request for 60 FPS does not guarantee 60 FPS delivery. CPU encoding,
network conditions, and the iPad viewer all affect responsiveness.

The encoder choices are auto, software, and vaapi. Auto uses supported VAAPI
H.264 encoding when detected and otherwise uses software encoding. During
setup, the development laptop selected software encoding. Forcing vaapi fails if the
required encode support is unavailable.

Custom size example:

  akimbo-display restart --model custom --resolution 1600x1050

Both dimensions must be even numbers between 320 and 8192. The host's total
desktop-size limit also applies. Orientation determines which dimension is
horizontal: landscape puts the larger dimension first; portrait reverses it.

A resolution override takes priority over a model's quality preset. Clear
it before returning to preset sizes:

  akimbo-display configure --model ipad-mini-7 --resolution ''
  akimbo-display restart


7. SAVING SETTINGS AND CHANGING SESSIONS

Use configure to save defaults for future sessions:

  akimbo-display configure --model ipad-mini-7 --resolution ''
  akimbo-display configure --orientation landscape --position below
  akimbo-display configure --quality balanced --fps 30
  akimbo-display configure --transport auto --encoder auto
  akimbo-display restart

The configure command prints the saved configuration. Without options it
re-saves and prints the current configuration. Changing configuration does
not alter a session that is already running; restart to apply it.

Options on start or restart override saved settings for that session only:

  akimbo-display restart --position left

An override is not saved and is not inherited by a later bare restart.
For example, after that command, "akimbo-display restart" uses the saved
position again. Use configure when you want a change to persist.

The possible positions are below, above, left, and right. Placement is
relative to the bounding rectangle of the active physical displays.

Preview geometry without changing the display:

  akimbo-display preview --position below

Preview uses the current desktop geometry. For planning from the original
layout, stop the existing Akimbo session before previewing.


8. COMMAND REFERENCE

  akimbo-display start [options]
      Start a session using saved settings plus any supplied overrides.

  akimbo-display restart [options]
      Stop and restore the current session, then start a new one. Start and
      restart both print the Safari address and access code.

  akimbo-display stop
      Stop streaming and restore the desktop. Attempts repair if needed.

  akimbo-display configure [options]
      Save defaults for future sessions and print the configuration.

  akimbo-display preview [options]
      Print proposed display geometry without applying it.

  akimbo-display status
      Print service state and the saved session details as JSON.

  akimbo-display url
      Print the viewer address for a running session.

  akimbo-display url --show-code
      Also print the private access code. Keep it out of shared logs.

  akimbo-display doctor
      Check session, display, network, backend, permissions, and firewall.
      This checks prerequisites; it is not a complete iPad acceptance test.

  akimbo-display setup-network
      Run privileged input/firewall setup for currently available supported
      networks. Also ensures the Akimbo input group and udev rules exist.

  akimbo-display repair
      Restore a retained recovery snapshot. The service must be stopped.

  akimbo-display models list
  akimbo-display models show MODEL-ID
      List model IDs, or show one model's details and preset sizes.

  akimbo-display install
  akimbo-display install --user-only
      Full installation, or copy the user command and service only.

  akimbo-display uninstall
  akimbo-display uninstall --system
      Remove the user command/service, optionally including system rules.

Options accepted by start, restart, configure, and preview:

  --model ID                Default: ipad-mini-7
  --quality PRESET          performance | balanced | native; default balanced
  --orientation VALUE       landscape | portrait; default landscape
  --position VALUE          below | above | left | right; default below
  --transport VALUE         auto | usb | wifi; default auto
  --resolution WIDTHxHEIGHT Explicit even resolution; default no override
  --fps NUMBER              1 through 60; default 30
  --encoder VALUE           auto | software | vaapi; default auto

These are the built-in defaults. Your saved configuration may differ.

Help:

  akimbo-display --help
  akimbo-display start --help

The _serve and _recover commands shown in help are internal service entry
points. Use start, stop, and repair for normal operation.


9. TROUBLESHOOTING

"Command not found"
  Open a new terminal after installation. You can also run the installed
  command directly:

    ~/.local/bin/akimbo-display status

  If it is absent, repeat the installation from your project directory.

"KeyboardInterrupt" during installation
  This means the process received an interrupt, commonly from Ctrl+C.
  That traceback alone does not identify a compiler failure. Completed
  build files are retained. Check whether the managed build is still active:

    systemctl --user status akimbo-build.service

  If it is still building, let it finish before starting another build.
  If it has stopped without completing installation, rerun the full install.
  If it fails again, retain the actual compiler/error lines before the
  traceback; those are more useful than a final interrupted-wait message.

Safari cannot open the page
  Check "akimbo-display status" and "akimbo-display url". Use the printed
  laptop address, http://, and port 1701. Check that the chosen network is
  reachable from the iPad. If the network changed, run setup-network and
  restart. Then reload Safari with the newly printed address.

"No usable usb link"
  A detected or charging iPad is not enough. The laptop needs an active USB
  network interface with an IPv4 address. Check the data cable, trust prompt,
  Personal Hotspot availability, and the output of:

    ip -brief address

  Use "akimbo-display restart --transport wifi" if USB networking is not
  available. A Wi-Fi-only iPad needs the Wi-Fi path in this implementation.

"Touch permission missing"
  Run the full install or setup-network, then log out and back in and run
  doctor again. The current controller requires writable /dev/uinput even
  if you intend to operate it only with the laptop mouse.

"WARN: UNVERIFIED" for the firewall
  The read-only firewall query was denied or timed out. This does not by
  itself prove that the connection is blocked. Run setup-network to apply
  the rules for the current supported network, then retry the connection.

The iPad shows black, or only an empty desktop
  Move a window into the iPad region. An empty virtual desktop may have no
  wallpaper. If the window also fails to appear, reload Safari and confirm
  that the viewer is using "Monitor: AKIMBO-IPAD". Restart Akimbo if needed.

The pointer or a dragged window stops at the laptop's bottom edge
  Cross near the middle of the edge because the default iPad monitor is
  narrower. Restore a maximized window before dragging if necessary.
  Restart Akimbo to apply the current compatibility fixes. If it persists,
  collect these diagnostics:

    akimbo-display status
    xrandr --listmonitors
    xprop -root _NET_DESKTOP_GEOMETRY
    journalctl --user -u akimbo-display.service -n 60 --no-pager

  With the tested 1920 x 1080 laptop and mini 7 balanced/below layout, the
  combined geometry should be 1920 x 2072. Different layouts have different
  values. Seeing both monitors in xrandr alone does not prove XFCE recognizes
  the full desktop.

The taskbar appears on the iPad
  Restart Akimbo to apply automatic panel pinning. If a panel is explicitly
  assigned to another output, Akimbo preserves that choice. In XFCE's Panel
  Preferences, select the laptop display (eDP on the tested laptop) for that panel.
  Then reload Safari if it still shows the old image.

Lag, high CPU use, or very small text
  Try "akimbo-display restart --quality performance --fps 30". If you saved
  a custom resolution, clear that override first so the preset can apply.
  A lower resolution also makes desktop controls larger in the fitted image.

"No unused display connector is available"
  The current method needs a spare output. An external monitor occupying
  the laptop's only HDMI output prevents this method from using that output.
  Stop Akimbo before changing physical display connections. Supporting both
  at once would require another available output or a different display
  backend, which this version does not configure.

"Cannot bind ...:1701"
  Another process may be using the port, or the selected address may no
  longer be available. Inspect the listener:

    ss -ltnp '( sport = :1701 )'

  Stop a separately launched Weylus instance if it is yours and you no
  longer need it. Do not terminate an unidentified process.

"Recovery snapshot exists" or a session fails to start
  Run stop, then repair. Read the service log if recovery fails. If physical
  monitor connections changed, restore the original connections and retry
  repair. Keep the snapshot until recovery has completed.


10. STOPPING, RECOVERY, AND REMOVAL

Move any windows you want to keep visible back onto the laptop, then run:

  akimbo-display stop

Akimbo removes its virtual monitor/mode, restores display positions and size,
restores managed panel selections and compositor preferences, and starts the
normal XFCE window manager. Shadows or transparency may look different while
streaming because compositing is temporarily disabled.

After an interrupted session, use:

  akimbo-display stop
  akimbo-display repair

Repair uses saved recovery information; it is not a general XFCE reset.
If there is no snapshot, it reports that there is nothing to recover.
After a reboot, it avoids applying obsolete physical monitor positions.

To remove the user command and service:

  akimbo-display uninstall

To also remove Akimbo's input rules, boot-time input-module configuration,
owned firewall rules, and the user's Akimbo input-group membership:

  akimbo-display uninstall --system

Removal retains installed Fedora packages, program/build data, configuration,
and shell backups. It does not delete this project directory.


11. FILES, PRIVACY, AND IMPLEMENTATION NOTES

Default locations (the ~ character means your home directory):

  ~/akimbo/
      Project source and this manual.

  ~/.local/bin/akimbo-display
      Installed command, linking to the installed application.

  ~/.local/share/akimbo-display/app/
      Installed copy of the controller and scripts.

  ~/.local/share/akimbo-display/bin/
      Weylus and the XFCE compatibility library.

  ~/.local/share/akimbo-display/build/
      Downloaded sources, dependencies, and reusable build files.

  ~/.config/akimbo-display/config.toml
      Saved settings.

  ~/.config/akimbo-display/access-code
      Private viewer access code. This manual does not contain the code.

  ~/.config/akimbo-display/recovery.json
      Recovery information retained while a session needs restoration.

  /run/user/<uid>/akimbo-display/
      Runtime state, viewer script, and private backend configuration.

  ~/.config/systemd/user/akimbo-display.service
      The user service definition.

Replace <uid> with your numeric user ID, shown by the command "id -u".
Custom XDG directory settings can change these paths.

The server uses HTTP and WebSocket on TCP 1701, bound to the selected laptop
network address. The access code controls access but does not encrypt the
desktop stream or the code in transit. Use a trusted local network or the
supported USB network. The program does not configure router port forwarding.

The input-access group permits synthetic input on the host. Only add trusted
users to it. The compatibility library is loaded into Akimbo's replacement
XFCE window-manager process; it does not install a global library override.

Useful diagnostic commands that do not start a display session:

  akimbo-display status
  akimbo-display doctor
  systemctl --user status akimbo-display.service
  journalctl --user -u akimbo-display.service -n 60 --no-pager

When sharing diagnostics, omit the access code and private backend config.

END OF MANUAL
